so nice to see you this seems to be all
the more advanced students or the
heartfelt student well courageous
students right yeah and you might have
heard the other night when I was coming
to talk about the twelve links we've got
it called and we finally found out there
was no class because there had been a a
gas leak but all of that has been fixed
so we have a nice nice temperature not
too hot not too cold hopefully no other
interruptions so the talk this weekend
is going to be on assumption called the
Mahamudra and to begin with we'll do a
little bit of meditation but we'll begin
that meditation was one of the breathing
exercises that is considered to be a one
of the close preliminary practices you
could say there's some preliminaries
that you do before the retreat or before
meditation like for instance collecting
virtuous karma by making prostrations or
mandala offerings purifying negative
karma by you know confessing and doing
Vajra Safa meditation and so forth guru
yoga for inspiration but then there when
you're in the actual meditative session
in a preliminary to the meditative
session you would do some breathing
extra exercise it's sometimes called in
because it's common not only between the
sutra tradition of Maha mudra and the
tight and the tantric Maha mudra which
will sort of differentiate and well it's
common to both of them sometimes in the
tantric Maha mudra is called expelling
the defiled airs defiled wins
have you have you done this before
it's called the nine round meditation oh
you have you so you just you just called
it nine round yeah sometimes just called
nine on it so they're different ways of
doing this basically what we will do is
we will breathe in through one nostril
let's say and you can do this to begin
with we can will their variation
sometimes you can use a finger to hold
one nostril close like you might try
this along with me so with your right
hand your index finger with the fingers
the nail side if it closed your left
nostril breathe in and you can imagine
that air going up what's called the
right Noddy
that's parallel to the central channel
down to your heart chakra which is
toward the back just in front of this
spine if you breathe in you hold it
there and imagine that the left channel
okay right here imagine that the left
channel has while you're doing that is
all of the negative energy of your body
and the form of black energy fills up
the left Nadi and then you move your
finger to the other nostril and you
breathe out the left nostril
imagine that you're breathing out all of
that black energy which is the amount of
the defiled mental factors you know
attachment and anger and so forth by
mount I might have mentioned before in
the same way that our horse rider is
mounted upon his or her horse
the wind ex is the vehicle of the mind
and so if you can control and visualize
the expelling of these defiled wins you
will deprive temporarily you can deprive
temporarily your system of having these
this tendency to generate those
particular minds ok so again so starting
off with the breathing on the right
nostril out the left then breathing in
the left nostril without moving the
finger in both cases holding imagine
while you're holding the right side is
filled with this white energy that you
imagine breathing in in each of the
cases when you breathe and imagine
breathing in the inspiration of the
Buddha's and Bodhisattvas in the form of
white light and energy the left side is
condensing and dancing from your body
all of the negative mounted wins of the
defiled mines along with winds that act
to be cooperative conditions for illness
they've read in here then you move your
finger down to your hello you put your
finger to the other side and you breathe
out your right nostril all the negative
energy including the winds that act as
cooperative conditions of illness and so
forth and then the third round you
breathe through both nostrils imagine
that the air the white energy comes in
down to your heart chakra through both
side naty's and at that at that heart
chakra you imagine that it that white
energy enters the central channel and
brings in all of the defiled energy of
ignorance into the the central channel
so how many rounds was that three rounds
a so then you do it again
I'm just doing it fast right and then
the final round of three that's one way
of doing the nine drum meditation is
that how you've done it or completely
doing second okay so they're different
and we will mention sometimes when you
get a depth if you were to do this over
if you do a retreat after some time you
don't need to close one of the nostrils
with your finger because you can
actually just consciously breathe in one
nostril and breathe out the other you
know so you don't have to use the
fingers and also you can do the nine
round like this also you can breathe in
and imagine when you breathe out this
first time very slowly you breathe out
the gross defilements then you pause and
then more subtle the violence and most
subtle defilements so there's already
three rounds just on one breath right
then you breathe in this one I know if
you could hear me breathing in second
and then the same thing
so then many many different ways you
could do sometimes it's advised to go to
bring the air to the navel chakra
especially when you're doing other kinds
of tantric meditations like - mo psychic
heat but here in the Maha mudra where
we're dealing with the subtle most mind
it's recommended to the heart chakra to
this heart area okay how do you feel
said does anyone need a refresher so why
don't you perform one or two rounds of
the nine rounds so that means to go
through those nine perhaps twice and
then just settle and watch your
consciousness okay I'm gonna start
myself
and let go of your attention to the
breathing just watch your mental
consciousness
you can scan your other senses remind
yourself it's not the eye consciousness
I'm going to pay attention to if your
eyes are slightly open that might be
still quite apparent not my ear nose
tongue tactile consciousness like a
turtle withdrawing its limbs imagine
pulling your attention into your heart
chakra just be aware of your thoughts
emotions maybe you're irritated maybe
you feel blissful
without getting involved with the
thoughts just be aware of the
spaciousness of the mind that allows
them to emerge and to dissolve appear
and disappear
at first you might have to withdraw your
attention back away from the census
again
if you sense a an idea of that
spaciousness within which the thoughts
are moving try to hold on to that sense
let go of the other thoughts by
depriving them of your attention and put
your attention onto that understanding
of this spaciousness of the mind it's
clear like nature
it doesn't have a color nor a shape or a
particular location
let go of the sense of your body
consciousness as though your body is
irrefutable either' present that's just
an appearance to your mental
consciousness
let go of the sense of I an observer
that's different than the mind but two
is appearing to your consciousness as a
image as a thought
try to touch that beer naked clear light
nature of your mind within which these
different concepts and thoughts are
arising images are arising
you may oscillate in and out of a little
bit of concentration on that may be
getting distracted doesn't matter go
back to that one you can
and recognize that even this appearance
of the clarity of the mind is as yet
itself an image mental image of your
mind based on some real-life
experimentation experience here so even
let go of that as though trying to sense
even the more subtle actual
consciousness within which this mental
image of the mind is arising the actual
clear light nature of the mind
then think this is the object that we're
going to be investigating this weekend
seminar this is a incredible resource
that we have understanding this mind
that we can let go of our negative
states our anger our attachment or
jealousy or putting ourself down or low
self esteem or pride all of these can be
eliminated eliminated from this clear
light nature of the mind and we can
repopulate it with positive thoughts
that are beneficial to our earth to
ourselves and to others love compassion
wisdom patience perseverance
try to make a motivation for this
weekend seminar especially tonight I'm
going to participate not simply to
accumulate some intellectual knowledge
but to heal myself for others healing
and developing go hand in hand it's like
purifying negative karma and creating
virtuous karma they take place
simultaneously when you heal yourself
spiritually you're developing positive
qualities so think I've got to try to
develop the most sublime spiritual
qualities Buddhist thought for ideal of
aiming to achieve enlightenment out of
compassion unbearable compassion for all
sentient beings and for that reason I'm
gonna listen to the teachings I'm going
to contemplate them weighed them in my
own mind and try to concentrate on the
meditate on them when I have some little
insight into them
and then relax your attention relax your
body bring your attention back to the
present
so I was at any anyone why - well since
they say it seven has anyone want to
share any observations or questions how
is it was it could you remember I think
some of you said you've done something
similar to this before or maybe exactly
like this the nine ROM meditation anyone
confused breathing in when you're
supposed to be breathing out or trying
to breathe out the finger
try to breathe out the nostril where the
finger was or anything that you I
remember when I first went to our
monastery in Nepal in 1974 and there was
a very mamma's oppa remember she gave a
very simple version just breathe in
white light imagine filling your body
this is what we should be doing also
when you breathe in the white energy of
the buddhas and bodhisattvas your gurus
in that nadi imagine that it provides
your body burning up all of the negative
energy you know both mental the the
vehicles of your mind and physical
ailments if you've got some chronic
problems even you know disease so I
would breathe in
at first I felt very defiled at the time
so it was it I was I didn't notice
anyone quite as bad as me as a little
bit better condition I think okay no
questions comments observations okay so
the course the course title is Mahamudra
and I think it was mentioned and they
should have been mentioned the
literature that we were gonna approach
was called the sutra Mahamudra although
that's not an official title is it was
it mentioned in the very few so what's
the meaning there what first of all what
is Maha mudra this is a book that I
would recommend if you haven't already
got it or is by my teacher Lama Yeshe
whose picture is up here you may
recognize just to the left of a tesha up
there mommy issue who was the the GU of
not a super Roma che and many of the
older students so Maha mudra Maha we
talked about before means great mudra
has different meanings from the tantra
point of view Maha mudra it has a
slightly different meaning than is meant
in the sutras sense you know what I mean
by Sutra and Tantra anyone that doesn't
know so in the Tantra sense the Maha
mudra is referring to a particular state
of mind the subtle most mental
consciousness that we're not touching
right now we're dealing with the gross
conventional consciousness gross mental
consciousness right beyond that is more
subtle and located at the heart chakra
is a very subtle wind which acts as the
mount of the of the subtle most
called clear light mind there's similar
in appearance if you were to get to that
place if you were able to see that to
the clear light nature of the gross mind
but that that subtle most mind can take
on a feeling of bliss mental bliss
through various exercises involving oh
little little bit like some of the
breathing exercises you we're doing now
but in in done in much more precise ways
over a long period of time at different
points in the body so that particular
mind when it is sealed so to speak it
was just one of the meanings of mudra
the Great Seal like something that
certifies that you you bought the
property or I mean you know you have to
go to the notary public usually to get a
some kind of seal nowadays the mind that
particulars subtle most mind when it's
sealed with great bliss and is able to
investigate emptiness that's in the
Tantra sense that's called the Maha
mudra makes sense you looking like not
quite sure yeah we're dealing with the
an approach with the gross mind not the
subtle most mind and so Maha mudra in
this case it has a slightly different
meaning I'm pretty much the same still
means Great Seal Maha means great mudra
maybe you've heard sometimes mudra also
means hand gesture you know you're
making the boudreaux for offering water
or something like this or that's one
meaning of mudra also mudra sometimes
refers to in certain tantric practices
when male and female are embracing it is
connected with the same kind of sense
of Mahamudra and the tantric sense that
one both of the the beings that are
embracing are referred to as mudras one
is the mudra of the other but here the
Maha mudra in the Sutra sense is
referring to the state of ultimate
reality emptiness it is that state of
emptiness which you could say is
indelibly sealed within all phenomena so
from the suture point of view it's
referring mainly to the object of
emptiness also to the subjective mind
that realizes emptiness is gross with
within our gross consciousness right now
and it's also it also refers to the
methods to bring about that realization
sometimes the action the activity so you
have the the object of emptiness the
subject of the mind that realizes it is
also called Maha mudra the practices the
actual mechanism by which you can bring
about that understanding which is
essentially what we're going to be
talking about the watching the the clear
light nature of the mind and so forth
that is also called Maha mudra
Oh
if you look through the sutras and if
you look through the Buddhist teachings
of contra we're so the Kangoo er the
actual proclamations of Buddha you won't
find the word Maha mudra in Buddhist
teachings you won't find it in the Sutra
or tantric teachings of the Buddha the
term seems to have arisen from the
practices of the the mahasiddhas did we
talk about that the other day that the
great realized ones Siddha si DDH a it's
a pretty good rendition of the Sanskrit
how would you pronounce that sit down
sit Azhar individuals beings who have
deep realizations those realizations are
feats and I'm not mispronouncing foot's
fe ATS those those realizations or feats
are called cities si DDH I
I'm putting the S on in English that's a
Sanskrit word plural wouldn't have an S
on the end of course Siddha and cities
so have you heard of the 84 Maha siddhis
no no you have
oh not related well who knows
generally generally not related to that
but it's still it's 84 right herb you've
heard of the 84 mosses that's a bit yeah
they could be they could be anyone's
yeah anyway any name they gave you you
say it could be yeah so the Maha siddhis
Laura were you gonna
I forgot your name you sit Laura yeah
you caught me in a lucky I'm usually
talk remember nazar easily maybe
starting a couple of hundred years after
the Buddha there's there are indications
and literature of great tantric adepts
in India practitioners of Tantra
although you don't find that they wrote
books right away they were practicing
the teachings especially of the tantric
Maha mudra to try to realize emptiness
with the subtle most mind around that
doesn't say about 400 years after the
Buddha it said that Nagarjuna you've
heard of Nagarjuna great both in Sutra
and Tantra Nagarjuna is said to have
given teachings on emptiness his
fundamental wisdom mullah Praja famous
texts that was the basis for all of the
further expositions about emptiness
reifying Buddhist teachings about
emptiness that Chucky Moony Buddha had
given in the sutras you know four
hundred years before that that had laid
a little bit dormant Mahayana teachings
Nagarjuna is also counted amongst the
eighty-four mahasiddhas
some of the other ones what one of them
was called SAR aha
have you ever heard of sera you might
might very interesting there are
biographies the translations of the
biographies of these very inspiring
asara ha was a flexure do you know what
that means
yeah
someone who are arrow-maker um I know
that family the Fletcher's in Nashville
so many of the Maha siddhis had
professions that they were they would
pursue in order to just make enough to
get by but they're the main practice was
the spiritual teachings maybe because
they were not they were not necessarily
monastics they had some kind of
profession other ones like till oppa
have you heard of till oppa till in
Sanskrit means sesame so he was a sesame
pounder making sesame oil Sara ha was an
arrow
Fletcher an arrow maker not all of them
took the names of their their part-time
professions but at a certain point their
teachings became transmitted and
eventually written before the time of
Christ and a group of 84 of them the
sort of arbitrary list sometimes
includes some people some list includes
someone else but generally includes
certain people like Nagarjuna Sarah ha
till oppa and some others not Papa they
had incredible ability to do - you know
- one of the one of the famous ones was
and I'm not sure which one of those and
maybe it was knocked papa but you can
see the stories he was a monk first then
he gave back his vows and went off the
tate in the forest and the King had
heard that he was not there alone he had
a consort like a lady friend and in
order to humiliate him he brought him to
town he said you were supposed to be a
monk now you've you
doing this and at a certain point I know
that went back and forth you know
accusation and so forth finally this
Maha Siddha he was actually practicing
the tantric Maha mudra he embraced his
wife and they appeared as chakras on
vara and his consort I think and the two
children and they had which the King
also had the core critical oh yeah
you're supposed to be a great Maha
Siddha or whatever you have children -
children became Bhadra and Belle the boy
became a Bhadra
[Laughter]
sometimes that lady I won't say her name
of that guy I've got a voice voice it
hears its name you're supposed to say
hey you know this person and it picks up
something and then it said I didn't
catch that or it even interprets
something that you're saying and as a
question
so if anyway that's good so he embraced
his son became a Vadra his daughter
became a bell he embraced his wife and
they rose up in the sky in the Qinglin
all of the criticized all of the
criticism and the townspeople that had
thrown mud and so forth that this was
not an ordinary being this was a Maha
siddhis
so this term Maha mudra arose amongst
the writings of these Maha siddhis great
Siddhas so citizens it is someone who
has some special feet or realization the
Maha siddhis were the ones who were in
the Buddhist path reaching trying to
achieve that realization of emptiness
with the subtle most blissful mind
realizing emptiness which would bring
them to if they could achieve that to
enlightenment even in one light
time that might otherwise in the
Buddhist outfit path take three
countless great eons have you heard that
before
how long is countless e'en beyond count
Kenda man actually it's the number
countless they only went up to a certain
number and they stopped that that number
was called countless most of the many of
you were here we were kind of in the
research triangle so you know
mathematical notation if I say ten to
the 59th do you know what that means ten
to the first would be ten there's just
one followed by one zero 10 right 10 to
the 59th means 1 followed by 50 9 zeros
so that they didn't have in Sanskrit
they didn't have at a certain time they
didn't have any number they had names
for all the numbers up to that but
there's no name for the numbers after
that later maybe they gave names I know
right that's such a large number but
that when they talk about 3 countless
great great eons it's referring to an
actual amount it's not like oh man
gazillion you know likes just
uncountable or something there now
they're there techniques for the tantric
mad Maha mudra and Nagas juna's
techniques to bring about a realization
of emptiness on the Sutra side Nagarjuna
was also a practitioner of Tantra who
wrote extensively about Tantra
especially a GUI a sahaja Tantra
Nagarjuna also were wrote essentially
all of his texts on emptiness were sutra
Maha mudra how to realize emptiness the
mechanism not not just the theory of
that but he wrote texts on how to
realize that that's a basis for the
sutra Maha mudra
so those teachings were transmitted over
time and especially in the transmission
to Tibet
in the car goo tradition you know you've
heard of the car Guba car you tradition
they Revere the transmission from
various of their teachers especially
marpa and Naropa passed on to to marpa
Naropa was a student of whom yeah no
really the other wait no no
Naropa was a student of till oppa Naropa
was a famous scholar at Nalanda the
monastic University in India maybe
around what sure exactly maybe around
900 of the late eight hundreds and he
sometimes to Naropa it's also counted
amongst the Maha siddhis Naropa felt a
little bit proud he knew all of the
Sutra teachings maybe even Tantra
teachings but he hadn't real the real
taste of it yet he was incredibly bright
guy the the crown jewel of all the
pundits at the time they realized once
and he at one time he met he was giving
a talk somewhere and afterwards he was
coming down walking around and maybe
feeling a little bit satisfied with
himself and an old lady appeared who
turns out actually was an emanation of
female aspect of the Buddha perhaps and
she was she asked him do you do you
really do you understand the words that
you were talking about you know do you
know you know what you're talking about
he said yes of course and she sort of
smiled and laughed and then she said but
do you realize the meaning have you
realized the meaning of those words
and he said oh of course and she started
crying and pulling her hair and
screaming and then sort of disappeared
you're not sure if she just you know
went behind some fog or a tree or she
just poof
and he thought wait what's what's
happening here and he began to search to
find out what how to get this real taste
she had kind of implied he might know
the words but he didn't know the meaning
so he searched for a long time so he cut
he came to the conclusion that he is
guru by hearing it from the sky would be
someone named till oppa who was the one
who crushed til sesame seeds so he went
around trying to find a great Maha
siddhis in India called because he was
in India never over trying to find chalo
but when he won one time searched a long
long time one place he was in town and
he said do you know the Maha siddhis
till open they said Maha siddhis hello
but no but there's a fishmonger down by
the lake down by the river is called
till oppa so he went down there and
suddenly he realized this is this was
his guru some very simple man who was
catching fish biting off their heads
taking the the the rest of the carcass
throwing it into the river where would
reanimate and swim off that's it whoa
again so he studied with kelapa this is
Naropa meeting till oppa and till oppa
sent him unto I can't remember nine or
twelve great deed just kind of like the
the labors of Hercules Hercules not hurt
you this was it Heracles perkiness kind
of like in Greek mythology and he would
do sometimes he would to plea to please
to look to lopa he would do something
like like tell Oh boohoo say if I had a
real disciple he would jump off this
cliff
I missed disciple he jump off the cliff
be down on the ground broken bones
Tallulah would come bless him and he
would be revived it's happened many
times
different kinds of things so he he
received Maha Maha mudra lineage from
till oppa in fact I was very fortunate
last year to receive transmission of
that particular teaching that till oppa
gave Naropa on the banks of the Ganges
River is called the Ganga ma you know in
India the Ganges is called Ganga we
angle sighs if they call it Ganges right
do you know the Ganges River you've
heard of it this country in India it's
called the Ganga Ganga bah with that
female particle and the end oftentimes
is just talking about the thing and the
Ganga
so that transmission of Maha mudra so
there were various transmissions from
the Maha siddhis to various people who
eventually were were brought to Tibet
through the cargo especially the cargo
some in the Mingma tradition some in the
Sakya when lama tsong khapa arrived he
studied especially with the the cargo
tradition received Mahamudra lineages
was called the distant lineages that
means from from Nagarjuna Dussehra how
these various teachings and the writings
they that some of them had or the oral
transmission of those teachings but lama
tsongkhapa
you may know was we believe was an
emanation of the buddha like that like
his holiness the dalai lama but we
believe is not an ordinary being lama
tsongkhapa also had a direct
communication with the buddha of wisdom
Manju Sri and manjushri gave to lama
tsong khapa what's called the short
lineage the direct linear whispered
lineage not in addition lama tsong khapa
also received all these lineages from
the maha siddhis but also this short
lineage from manjushri on the sutra Maha
mudra
and that's basically what we're going to
be talking about this weekend just a
little overview
so in a nutshell what what is what is
the procedure what is because I said
Mahamudra can refer to the object of
emptiness and we talked about sutra Maha
mudra it can refer to the subjective
mind that realizes it but mainly is
referring to the method that you're
using to bring about that realization
something very special there are two
ways to go about realizing emptiness one
is that you first develop an
understanding of the view of emptiness
intellectually you delineate you may
study for a long time you may be study
that the texts of Nagarjuna like in the
monasteries you read chandrakirti and
all of these other things you debate you
get an understanding of that and on that
after some time you use your
understanding of emptiness then as your
object of meditative practice you try to
develop single-pointed concentration
with that emptiness is your object first
you understand emptiness you get a
general image of it and then later as
though on top of that you develop the
experiential meditative approach to that
Joie
oh it could be yeah
you first well analytical meditation
would be involved also in the beginning
part but when you try to develop once
once you've you've got that like for
instance if you've received teachings on
schemata um calm abiding we call Shinae
and tibetan their various objects you
can take as your object of sheena maybe
buddha in front or
so it's synchronistic the it was the
Buddha saying you know the Buddha
you can take various things as your
object you can take for instance love
and compassion is your object of Shinae
but you can actually take emptiness as
your object of sinead if you have
understood it correctly first then you
develop with that as your object
and then you develop the passion of RIA
to be able to realize it where is in the
Maha mudra and one of course that that
is suitable and incredibly profound in
many many great beings that's there
that's how they've realized CEMP teenis
delineating emptiness first and on top
of that developing a meditative
experience whereas the Maha mudra it's
the other way around
first we develop a meditative experience
not of emptiness yet because we haven't
understood the meaning but we develop a
strength while abiding on the clear
light nature of the mind why why is that
special why is it going to be something
that we can add the understanding of
emptiness onto later
you know the view the correct view of
emptiness on because the clear light
nature of the mind has a certain aspect
as we're looking at it when you were
watching your your mind the clear light
nature of the mind you may have had a
feeling of the spaciousness the non its
formless then it's unobstructed nature
which is similar to the aspect of empty
and emptiness emptiness is said to be a
negative phenomenon that doesn't affirm
anything else it just negates existence
if you were if you might have had a
chance to listen to the talk was it last
night um on the Heart Sutra I mentioned
about emptiness is the experience at
first who is what's called space like
meditation on emptiness
if you have that view it's not as though
if you're meditate
the emptiness of visual form or form the
form of your body it's not as though at
that point the form is there qualified
by something else there's no form at all
in that meditation on emptiness one of
the verses in the Heart Sutra in
emptiness there is no form and so forth
you know there is no I no air no nose
touch and so forth it's it's a what's
called an absolute negation a non
affirming negation doesn't affirm it
anything else in this place just space
like knit vacuity so the object in the
Maha mudra the Sutra Maha mudra is a
clear light nature of a mind it shares
some qualities with the meditative
experience of emptiness and also the
post meditative experience of emptiness
in when you when you were if you were to
have experience of the clear light
nature of the mind it said that when you
arise from that meditative experience
you haven't realized something that's
you know you just have this long period
of time you're concentrating and the
clear light nature of your mind no other
thoughts are occurring in your mind you
arise from that and it's said that
everything else around you looks in
substantial you know kind of like
doesn't have the same solidity that it
seemed to have before which is another
feature in common with the experience
post meditation on emptiness if you've
realized emptiness when you arise from
that you know there we say there are two
stages of meditation on emptiness
through that space like meditation on
emptiness where only that vacuity
appears and then the post meditative
experience which said called
doesn't mean oh the mirage like
meditation is is everything seems like
like a like a mirage or a dream so even
though you're meditating on something
different here when you're meditating on
the Maha mudra the Sutra Maha mudra were
we're looking at the conventional nature
of the mind not the ultimate nature of
the mind but there are certain
similarities both in the meditative
States and in the post meditative state
to the experience of emptiness and it's
just peripherally the real special
feature is that by familiarizing with
mind the conventional nature of the mind
then when you add the view you will be
realizing not the emptiness of form or
trees or the buddha or yourself you'll
be meditating on the emptiness of the
mental consciousness of the mind and
it's said that because the mind is the
ultimate subject of all our experiences
by realizing the emptiness of the mind
you indirectly realize the emptiness of
all of its objects so in one fell swoop
you can make very rapid spiritual
progress make some sense so that's what
we're gonna be talking about this
weekend especially this close lineage
that lama tsong khapa receives from
manjushri and i point to my ear as
though he was as though manjushri was
whispering in his ear we call it and for
some time after all lama tsongkhapa lama
tsongkhapa passed it on originally only
to a select number of disciples maybe
one at a time or a small group that's
why it's sometimes called the ear the
whispered lineage or the ear whispered
lineage or the ear lineage you might
think is like there's a rosary of ears
or something
not like that the ear lineage ear
whispered lineage lama tsongkhapa passed
this very special lineage which is
became called the galue ba in its word
cog you like we say the cog your
tradition it can meet you sometimes the
title of the text that were that is the
the tibetan text is the basis for this
is Gaelic kagu mahamudra and you might
think oh it's a combination of the cargo
and the what lama tsongkhapa
received from manjushri the this close
lineage but there's also a tradition
that says that it's actually referring
to the common speech view it's almost
like the ear whispered lineage of the
galoot ba okay so that's the text the
text itself was composed and it's
interesting it was composed by an
individual called the panchen lama have
you heard of the pension Lama yep so he
also wrote a commentary he wrote a very
brief text that we is the basis for
commentaries in fact we're going to read
that as for part of the course it's at
the end of this book highway of the
conquerors a Mahamudra route text of the
precious ganden oral tradition again
then is another name for galoop again
gaywad means virtual denpa means having
the virtuous tradition when lama
tsongkhapa was first
assembling disciples his tradition had
various names one time was called the
ganden tradition the virtuous tradition
sometimes later they were yellow hats
that the British pundits that came to
call that the the yellow hat tradition
have you ever heard that that's not a
Tibetans name at all so it was just like
Western kind of idea later they were
called the GaN denta for the name of the
monastery that lama tsong khapa called
created called gunden
I don't know if any of you been to
anyone been to Tibet here no there's a
one of the three main monasteries near
losses called gandan it's also one of
the name of one of Robert Thurman's sons
his daughter is named uma right which is
an is very is a play on words because
uma is the name of the Hindu goddess who
is the consort of byra WA the wrathful
deity but uma also is the name for the
middle way majolica and it's also the
name of the central channel the the
central the middle channel that goes
from your brow chakra to your crown so
he was what he named his I think that
was his first child I think LUMO was his
first child you know who I'm talking
about the movie actor so he's kind of a
play on words satisfied the Hindus and
the Buddhists and monica's and the tenth
Rica's and everything one of his sons is
called gunden but later it was it became
the gay Luke bah so the virtuous
tradition so here is it's at this time
it was called the precious ganden oral
tradition by the first pension lama
lo sang kooky Gelson so a little bit
curious because if you look at the
commentary that this lama wrote to his
very condensed text it's still committed
it's understandable but it's kind a
little bit cryptic he wrote a comma and
an auto commentary to it you can write a
commentary to the teachings of someone
else if you write a commentary to your
own composition it's called an auto
commentary right make sense so that
commentary in the Caliph owned of that
it says composed by the fourth pension
Lama so the this one says the first
pension mama but it also has the name
Lausanne shogi Gelson so do you know
what what what's asked about I might
have mentioned this the other day you
know the story how the Dalai Lama the
first Dalai Lama was he called Dalai
Lama when he was life no how about the
second third
third went to you say yeah but also
during his life of course but the fourth
was also called learning as a third was
given the name Dalai Lama by Altan Khan
I'm not sure he was into the court of a
Mongolian Khan not Co an allusion to
political situations in the United
States now he was his name ended with
Gaston the 3rd Dalai Lama well as part
of many of the Dalai Lama's names not
all of them have the word Gaston in it
do you know what the word Gaston means
in Tibetan means ocean large body of
water ocean like our president Allen
Thomas Tenzin Gyatso
he has other names too but those are the
main two Tenzin Gyatso
so the 3rd Dalai Lama the Mongolians
couldn't they could pronounce a lot of
the Tibetan words but in their way of
speaking
they couldn't say Ghats so easily it
came out even when I visited Mongolia Oh
10 years ago or something if I asked
them to pronounce cats so if I wrote it
down even those that could read the
other the Tibetan text it would come out
sounding like chomps it didn't sound
like gasps OH
so instead of calling him the gateau
Lama the Mongolian King used the
Mongolian word for ocean Dalai the
factor when I looked in the in some of
the classrooms there would be a map of
Mongolia and I had to learn a little bit
of the Cyrillic script that they still
used it because of their connection with
Russia and the in the past they were
under the influence of Russia a look at
map large lake and it was something
something Dalai so this still used still
part of their language
the Dalai Lama was given that name the
third Dalai Lama got the name and then
what would we say post-humans
posthumously the second dialling I was
at oh he is the second Dalai Lama and
the first one of that lineage was called
the first Dalai Lama it's a similar
thing here the the author of our text
was the first one that was given the
name Panchen Lama he wasn't given that
name by a Mongolian he was given that
because of the he was the abbot of Tashi
loom bow this famous monastery in Tibet
and the lamas of that had previously
been given the names pension which means
great pandita chen in tibetan means
great tempo pan is short for pandita the
sanskrit word for we even use that word
in stock market or the the stock market
pundits are saying apples going up or
this or that you ever use that word
pundit so he was called they were called
they the pensions and so he was called
when he he received this teaching from
lama tsong khapa the ear whispered
lineage through various lamas over a
couple of hundred years and at that
point he realized it was time that this
should be not only whispered for one or
two disciples at a time but that it was
the right time to expose to a wider
audience so he wrote this root text and
in that kolja phone he said first
pension lama when he wrote the
commentary it was all repair intime
people had enshrined that the pre the
previous three incarnations as opposed
to the dalai lama was the previous two
there was a third pension lama so that
wasn't now he was the pension lama
although he wasn't called a pension lama
at the time the second one the first one
so now the first pension lama is someone
back there and he was called the fourth
panchen lama so there's a little
disparity between
the route text and the commentary
they're written by the same person at
one point he was called the first
pension Lama later is called the fourth
Panchen Lama I have not seen that
anywhere in any of the commentaries I've
read there is very interesting because
sometimes in the same volume it will
talk about the route text by the first
pension Lama loose and choke Eagleson
and then the commentary by the fourth
pension Lama
blouson tricky Yeltsin not not being
confused by that that was interesting
they had the exact same name but it was
because of that that interesting
situation so the pension lot the the
first pension Lama or in this case the
fourth Panchen Lama this individual
essentially Yeltsin who wrote the route
in the commentary that we're basing
lemon DSU's teachings based on both the
route text in the commentary he was said
to be a reincarnation of an Sabah Galois
and sapa who was in that lineage from
lama tsong khapa to the first pension
Lama or a fourth person little said
tricky Yeltsin his direct guru was
called I think Louis on Yeshe but the
previous Lama in the lineage that had
come from lama tsongkhapa was a great
sabaton master called Galois Galois
means Victor like Conqueror and sapa it
was a maybe named after the place in
tibet that he was from i'm not sure he
was considered to be a reincarnated Lama
and Galois Appa is said to be a someone
who achieved enlightenment in one
lifetime through these this guy Luke
Maha mudra this close lineage in his
suite of rooms at ganden monastery I
believe it was God and I'm not sure his
daivam Sara I think was kind of or Tashi
limbo I'm not sure where who actually I
don't know which monastery was but he
was he himself was a lama and he had his
own suite of rooms he was someone who is
recognized as a reincarnation and as
today reincarnated Lamas would often
have accumulated from the previous times
of their reincarnation housing and some
money that would allow them to live in
relative comfort is that that kind of
housing is called a LeBron maybe if you
visited Sarah anyone visit Sarah here
did you visit oh sell LeBron where llama
Oh sell lived anyway that's a LeBron
means the residence of a llama LeBron
and so Galois and Sapa the previous
incarnation of the first loss on Chuckie
Yeltsin was someone who achieved
enlightenment in in comfort as opposed
to Miller epi' who lived in a cave only
one little white cloth and one bowl that
got broken and everything when one of
our nuns I think she might have been
here at one time visited long long time
ago took in one more on Egypt in one
more
honey took the wrong will wanted to do a
lama told her she had to do was it she
didn't want her to do she told her to do
a three-year retreat and like and sapa
her father had written a Gunsmoke
Hollywood you know that thing on TV
Western yeah that Western and so if you
ever look at her her name was Heather
her Lane name was was it Heather Meston
yeah I can't remember her first name if
you look on the I noticed in Asheville
and though the cheap channels that you
know have the old westerns Gunsmoke is
on now and there's her father message in
is like the writer you know better so
she had a little bit of money and so he
llama said you should be like llama
you know gala and sapa you build your
three-year retreat house it was right in
front of to schita i think it's still
there you know with two floors wall
doorbell gas stove
the other meditators have a little mud
hut with a little mud wall around it and
their food is put in by a plate she had
microwave and and everything
refrigerator and sent up messages to get
things from Delhi and stuff like that
and so he had her commissioned a
painting to put on the side of her house
for meditation houses she was supposed
to do for three-year retreat a picture
of Galois and sapa so that the Tibetans
who came by thinking of those in jeez
you know that means Westerners in jeez
it's kind of like from the word England
you know is though it we're all from
England
oh those in jeez you know they got so
much money they don't have any
renunciation but showing reminding them
that our great gal wa and sapa achieved
enlightenment in comfort so you can do
it too if you've got your what was it
infinity or your Lexus or whatever or
your your very nice palatial home don't
feel like you have to give that up you
can be like L wa and sapa okay so that
lineage went from lama tsongkhapa
through various llamas to loss on sugar
yeltsin who was the reincarnation of one
of that lineage called yahwah and Sabu
who had realized in the Mahamudra so
this this particular teaching is
considered to be especially blessed
because of that so I'll just read a
little bit of this as we go along and
comment on it we're going to be
alternating between hearing these this
technique about this technique and
trying to practice it we've already done
that at the very beginning we did our
first actually I've led that meditation
and some of the other classes too but
maybe not as in as much detail but maybe
now as I've given a little nutshell view
of this technique well I haven't
actually finished it's nutshell till you
so from the Sutra Mahayana sutras Maha
mudra close lineage from
some kapa which is not exactly the same
as the car goo sutra tradition a little
bit different what one does is one first
of all he has a meditative experience of
the clear light nature of the mind which
what we're doing and there there will be
more explanations of how to identify
this that we've been trying to identify
this clear light nature of the mind once
you've identified that you use that is
your object of to develop tranquil
abiding calm abiding you know what is
that schemata or what we said sheen a
right in tibetan you mean you may have
heard different names for it so you may
resonate with different other thing
different of those names so you take
that as your object of concentration
then on the basis of developing a
concentration developing single pointed
concentration on there clear light
nature of the mind and when like I said
when you arise from that concentration
everything looks very insubstantial and
so forth and the basis of that the mind
is very very quiet thoughts are not
coming and you can investigate the sense
of a person personal self the self that
seems to be appearing in our mind right
now from the let's say from the the
tradition where you develop the view
first and then you develop the
meditative experience one of the most
difficult things to do is to recognize
that which is to be negated impersonal
selflessness have you heard that before
recognizing the object of negation just
something some of you at least some of
you are familiar with have you ever
heard okay it's not easy sometimes in
meditation that you're asked to
instigate that by remembering someone
acute falsely accusing you of doing
something and when the sense of I
appears that sense of I is not the body
not even related to the bar
but not totally not the sense that it
doesn't have anything to do with the
body
it's not the mind it's something that
seems to be autonomous existing there
from its own side but very difficult to
sustain that because it's very very
subtle it's said to be there all the
time in our mind in our gross mind that
sense of self and our ignorance that
from these other courses where I said
grasps to that assumes that it's really
there we call self grasping that's the
basic ignorant that keeps us within
cyclic existence but it's very difficult
to identify that eye because it's so
subtle you have to have a very calm mind
here once you've taken the clear light
nature of the mind in the sutra Maha
mudra as your object of concentration
mind has become much quieter than now
and you can watch within that mind in
and and recognize that subtle object of
negation more easily
so once you've developed you may not
have to develop complete tranquil
abiding first but you have a quite good
concentration under clear light nature
of the mind then you can switch over to
rep - trying to identify the object of
negation of personal selflessness
because the mind that you were taking as
your object of concentration is now your
laboratory not you know nothing else
there are no other thoughts no worries
no attachments so you can recognize this
and within that mind add the view
remember that the Sutra Maha mudra as
opposed to the ordinary way of first
delineating the view and then adding the
meditative experience the Sutra Maha
mudra first have a meditative experience
on the concentration on the clear light
nature of the mind and then add the view
what that means first
all to recognize that this self that
you're trying to that you've trying to
instigate to recognize the object of
negation you apply the classic majolica
reasonings to prove that it could not
exist the way that it appears but
because your mind is so calm it's said
to be relatively easy at that time they
have some insight into personal
selflessness to have an insight into the
emptiness of the person when you have
some insight into that then you can let
go of that and apply the same reasoning
to the mind itself which you've been
very familiar with for a long period of
time you've been meditating and the
clear light nature of the mind first
just concentrating on it and then using
it as a laboratory to watch the self now
letting go of the self and applying the
same reasoning of emptiness to the
mental consciousness and to the aim of
the Maha mudra then is to have that
realization of the emptiness of the mind
itself the clear light nature of the
mind this is kind of like football coach
giving you like that you know we're
gonna beat him because we've been to
this that we're going to again at the
halftime we're gonna do this so you got
a little view where where we're starting
and where we're going okay and right in
a nutshell or a watermelon maybe he said
he said this was too big to be a
nutshell that was more like a cantaloupe
or something okay any questions are we
doing making sense okay
okay so let me let me start reading a
little bit here this same text is
translated in other places you can find
it the root X I also have a translation
here by old Alex Burson when in from his
book the Dalai Lama's book on Maha mudra
that Alex kind of edited and had
translated various of the teachings that
is an excellent book I don't have it
with me but if you wanted to augment
this with a book that would be very
excellent that much thicker and a lot of
teachings by the Dalai Lama going into a
lot more detail also another very
incredibly good and valuable source is
this book that I'm not sure if it's
still in print you may be able to find
it used maybe you can find it Echo's
avoid 'no spy guess she wrapped him was
translated by the Stephen bachelor who's
sort of renowned nowadays it has three
parts to it one part is the Heart Sutra
the second part is the wisdom chapter of
the majolica Vitara chandrakirti's texts
and the third part is guess you wrapped
in commentary on the Maha mudra the same
girl oopah Mahmud Ragesh guess she
wrapped it in with Lama Yeshe is guru
and Lama Zopa suru guess she wrapped in
some s she wrapped in was the Lama who
told Lama Yeshe you should take this boy
SOPA to be your disciple as Lamas a yes
she was still student you know older
student at the time old much older than
Lama Zopa Burma Shaykh ten years older
and he took Clemens oppa to be his ward
so to speak it was remember Shea lovers
overs or mache at the behest of geshu
wrapkin so there's some close relation
so this particular the third part of
this text very very excellent guess she
wrapped him just fantastic fantastic now
it was one of my teachers and
so the last third of the book is his
presentation in Mahamudra so if you get
a chance if you want to indulge into
this as your life work it would be
nothing more sublime that you can do
with your life than to devote the rest
of your life to realize that Mohammed
Rafi this would be a squid start guess
you're wrapped in book and then the book
that Alex translated of the His Holiness
is teachings there are many books you
can find kargh enigma on Mahamudra by
Westerners by scholars so many but I'm
not so sure this this is called Maha
mudra how to discover our true nature
it's in the bookstore and if you like it
on your iPad or your what are your
galaxy or whatever you can go to
amazon.com and in one minute you can
download it I think it's about the same
price as the hard as the softball
edition ok yes she was putting it there
so that it's on the tape so what I
wasn't I was asking what was the name of
the book by His Holiness Oh No venerable
says it was it is the the galoop / kagu
tradition of Maha mudra by the Dalai
Lama trans with Alex
Alexander person so you can find that
also in Amazon I don't know if it's a
yes you can get no there's no PDF of it
you can get it on Kindle you Amazon use
for eight forty-nine plus shipping and
you can get the Kindle for $29.99 is
what I meant not necessary yeah yeah
the gloop GTL ug / kagu KAG why you
tradition of Maha mudra
so that gay Luke / cog you some people
take that to mean a combination of the
short lineage that lama tsongkhapa heard
along with the long distance that came
through the kagu tradition of the Maha
mudra but also in the gloop had said
that cog you doesn't mean the COG you
tradition it's referring cop view the
oral tradition of the galoop ahh
whispered lineage so there's a little
you know you can take it both ways okay
we're okay so I'll start namu Mohammed
Raya it's a homage in Sanskrit even
though it's the Tibetan text how much -
maha homage was a homage or homage herb
or herb okay herb homage Maha mudra the
all-pervasive nature of everything so
the first verse is coming that's that's
just how much first verses will be
understood I bow with respect to the
feet of the incomparable guru the Lord
of Siddhas who teaches the naked state
of reality indivisible and inexpressible
sphere of the Vajra mind you know what
the word Vajra means he says the
implement that you see in the rituals
when you know maybe guess she was
holding it was in his right hand the
Vajra and ringing battle of gonta in the
other hand tibetan word for Vajra a head
15 zing cliche the door chain right now
you probably know someone named or J is
a common name the this the Bell is in
Tibetan is called dil vil like there's
famous GaN tapa guild Bupa different
people named that so Vajra symbolise
is very the symbolizes several things
like the inseparable union of great
bliss mine realizing emptiness they're
the two sides of the vajra joined as one
remember I mentioned from the tantra
point of view Mahamudra didn't refer so
much just how to realize emptiness with
the conventional mind it had to do with
developing the ability to awaken the
subtle most clear light mind and induce
it to have a great bliss experience
what's called innate great bliss and
with that great bliss mind to bring the
understanding of emptiness that you've
understood in the Sutra Maha mudra first
you develop sutra Maha mudra to
understand the emptiness of the mind
then you you receive ten trick
initiations you practice the tantric
Maha mudra to develop this subtle most
clear like mine blissful mine innate
great bliss and you recall the meaning
of emptiness that you've previously
recall developed to the sutra maharaja
there's some kind of connection
so Vajra here is referring to that that
union of great bliss and emptiness the
realization of emptiness also refers to
combination of just in general method
and wisdom the ultimate method from the
boot from the Sutra point of view is
what bodhichitta ultimate wisdom is the
empty wisdom of emptiness from a Tantra
point of view there is more subtle
kinds of method more you know the great
bliss is also considered method union of
great bliss and wisdom of emptiness okay
I bought with respect at the feet of the
incomparable guru the Lord of cities you
know that we're sitting out the realized
ones who teach who teaches the naked
state of reality the individual
an inexpressible sphere of the vajra
mind having condensed the essence of the
ocean of sutra and tantric advice so
both the the oral tradition that lama
tsong khapa had also from and russia
included tantric practices of Mahamudra
not just a sutra having condensed the
essence of the ocean of sutra and
tantric advice i will write down the
instructions of the ganden oral
tradition of Maha mudra of the supreme
Siddha Dharma Bhadra and his followers
who give sound instruction so Dharma
Bhadra was the name of the one of the
again one of the lineage Lamas in
Mahamudra from lama tsongkhapa I'm not
sure Dharma Bhadra came before in Sapa
or after but in that lineage that was
the loss of cooky Gelson received he's
paying homage to one of the also one of
the other ones besides in Sabbath in
this Maha mudra lineage who was also a
great Maha Sidda
Revere it amongst the Tibetan misses
you're just absolutely amazing I think
some people believe he's still alive
today okay I'm just checking
could be anyone could be any one of you
could be her so this the text in the
Tibetan tradition they often will they
have put sort of outlines this has three
outlines three parts the preparation the
actual practice and the conclusion so
preparation which is what we're going to
be spending a little time on first
earnestly go for refuge and generate
bodhichitta do you all know what that
means it said that at the beginning of
any Buddhist practice one should even
though you are you may be consider
yourself a Buddhist and you are a
buddhists you should reveal phi your
state of faith in the Buddha taking
refuge the Buddha the Dharma and the
Sangha accumulating merit by so doing
and also to generate the motivation of
Buddha Sheeta what's the cause of Refuge
how do you know how do you take refuge
you just say that we have to say it in a
certain way certain words namo guru
buddha jana mo da Maya is that taking
refuge you're afraid to anybody you're
afraid because I'm they're taking
rubbish yeah buddha nam saranam gacchami
domino just saying the words is just
mere words of refuge maybe it leaves
some imprint in the mind to reach the to
encounter those words again in the
future life not so useful what state of
mind do you need to develop to say those
words so it actually becomes taking of
refuge good okay someone you've guessed
I've been priests gosh look if she's
sure okay I'll tell him his students
knew
what refuge so we say that there are
well even even more elemental than that
it said you need to have some
apprehension or fear about your
situation at the minimum fear that you
don't know where you're going to go
after death
not so much fear for this life fear for
future rebirth that you might go to the
hell realm of the animal realm the
crater realm and out of that
apprehension fear at least have hope
that the Buddha Dharma and Sangha can
help that's the absolute minimum
generally say faith but when you talk
about right now if you just encounter
Buddha Dharma and something the first
time you just came from the evangelical
church or something is that I don't have
any faith in Buddha but you might have
some hope so even that is said at the
beginning understanding the qualities of
Buddha and having faith or at least hope
that by following the instructions of
the Dharma the teachings of the Buddha
that one can be protected they prove
form a refuge for you
okay so first go for refuge and generate
bodhichitta so this this is this means
in an actual session right meditative
session so we didn't do that at the
beginning we began with a breathing
meditation but it became implicit in our
meditation and the clear light nature of
the mind because the teachings were from
the Buddha the Dharma and I it's I said
that we should try to we should try to
motivate for the weekend seminar and for
this particular class to try to heal
ourself in an ultimate way for the
benefit of others which is kind of like
a the sense of Buddha Cheatham so first
earnestly go for refuge and generate
bodhichitta since these are the gateway
and the central pillar of the teachings
and especially the Mahayana so the the
gateway and central teachings of the
Buddhist teachings in general and
especially the Mahayana meaning the
bodhichitta this should not be mere
words
you have to know and you in refuge and
of course bodhichitta are things that
develop it's not as though you you might
think you took refuge with the Karmapa
in 1987 and so you don't have to take
refuge anymore i tease the people in
singapore that they because they I asked
them what's on their identity card they
say oh it says religion buddhist i said
that make you a buddhist you know as you
say i'm a buddhist here's my identity
card are you from singapore back there
yeah where are you from china are you
buddhist do you have it on your card no
i'm just see I'm just teasing just easy
just do you think it's easy so we have
to we have to try to develop that first
of all at the beginning because seeing
the reality of mind depends on amassing
the collections and what does that mean
the collections and purifying negativity
first recite the hundred syllable mantra
at least a hundred thousand times Karen
and do as many hundreds of prostrations
as you can while reciting the confession
of downfalls so this is talking about
some of the the preliminaries and then
actually another preliminary from your
heart make repeated requests to your
root guru who is indivisible from all
the Buddha's not invisible indivisible
from all the Buddha's of the three times
so it's talking about reciting the
hundred syllable mantra of of whom Vadra
Safa that means here there sometimes we
some of the other long mantras like
there's a long
dorami of a Lulu Kadesh vara sometimes
called a hundred syllable mantra or a
hundred syllable durrani but here it's
referring to the hundred syllable mantra
the long mantra of Vajrasattva so it's
not enough to say
hundred thousand times I'm vodka shot
for who know budgets every point you
have to do the long one okay so it's
worthwhile memorizing that none'll if
you haven't I did you say you remember I
said this so I was very that was very
pleased that some of you said that
you've memorized that mantra because
when you do a retreat if at that time
you're just saying it for the first time
so looking at the paper it'd take you a
week or two to before your tongue gets
used to saying that so if you're used to
saying that now we knew when you try to
collect these things it's easier so here
just mentions three things it has a tune
I didn't know that okay I heard are you
using Beyonce or sure sometimes you go
to YouTube you can hear like oh money
pay me home and from Taiwan or China or
something but this doesn't have a tomb
mantra well no that's if you in a class
but when you do it yourself you don't do
it that you say it just so that you
yourself can hear it just so you can
hear it
you heard me because I'm speaking in the
microphone sometimes if you're in a
group of people that you hear some
people that are near you that are
chanting they disturb you that they're
saying it too loud you shouldn't you
shouldn't be able to hear other people
should be just loud enough that you hear
so here is talking about three
preliminaries basically it's talking
about recitation of the the purification
mantra of Vajrasattva which includes the
meditation visualization Vajra satva on
your head
with or without embracing consort
depends on which Tantra you're using
reciting the mantra and imagining white
light and nectar coming into your body
first going down purifying pushing out
all the negativities of body after a
certain number of mantras maybe a whole
rosary or just twenty-one then
the nectar coming up filling up your
body like filling a bottle in the
kitchen you know that's it's got some
gunk in it you fill it up the water and
then brings it out the top and then
light coming right to your heart chakra
just in your mind like turning on a
light bulb all imagine your
consciousness there this if you can do
this this is the best of all of them
this is the one that's most connected
with the tantric meditations mama yes
you used to say this is the one that you
would do preliminary if you're
practicing completion stage just the one
at the heart chakra light coming there
imagine if you have some understanding
of emptiness also realizing the
consciousness is empty it can be all of
the past imprints of numberless lives
and the future direction of your mind
you can be purified with this white
energy if you close your eyes now maybe
there's darkness if you purify your mind
with Vajra satva maybe you close your
eyes there's whiteness you know and then
a combination all three together down up
and light all at one time
so that's one of the problem one here
and then it says at least it do as many
hundreds of prostrations as you can
while reciting the confession of
downfalls what's the confession of
downfalls well here it doesn't say
generally a confession of downfalls
generally here is this nunchuck which
means the what you understand is the
confession Sutra of the 35 Buddha's
actually what does that actually call it
you know do you know Robbie where does
it come from it's actually sometimes
it's called in the older text is called
the Sutra of the three heaps Trice conda
sutra tribe means three Skanda like we
say or we say the the yeah the Sutra of
the three skandhas it comes from the
large one of the large Mahayana sutras
it comes from and I can't remember which
that is I'm sorry you find out one
chapter of that is a chapter on morality
and the Buddha or manjushri
I think it's manjushri is being
interrogated by Upali do you know who
poly is what are the Buddhist disciples
who is Rupali oh yeah I thought anyone
know who well polly was so remember
we're talking about when the Buddha left
home when we talked about the Jataka
tales I think I mentioned Upali
he was the barber remember when
Shakyamuni when Siddhartha becomes
Buddha the all of his relatives wanted
to come the noblemen and they wanted to
do the same thing they went to the stupa
where he had left home they cut off
their hair took their jewelry and
clothes and gave it to the barber who
had accompanied them they thought he
would take it back to the couple of us
to where they were from they have left
like Siddhartha did on this great search
and and Upali was very smart he was a
barber so low caste right and not one of
the noblemen and he said listen guys I
can't do this because if I go back with
your things they'll think I killed you
before he get to the gates they'll kill
me so I've I'll act as your servant
along the way they said oh okay you know
they nobleman and so when they came to
the Buddha they asked requests for
ordination and the Buddha knowing all of
this ordained
Upali first because in the Sangha there
is the short remember the story the four
harmonious friends some of you were at
the it depends on seniority you know who
is ordained first in the Sangha so when
who Poli was ordained first that meant
the other noble men had to let him sit
in the high sea the best seat he gets
served first they had to bow to him and
so forth so it was it was quite fitting
so Polly who is the foremost in
moral discipline sorry Jason I tell you
so he's foremost in ethics morality of
the he Liana of like shariputra remember
well you were here not all of you were
here for the heart suture think
shariputra was considered to be foremost
amongst the Buddhist he jnana disciples
shravakas in wisdom and he's in the
heart sutra he's asking of a look at the
chart how did the Bodhisattvas I know
how the implication I know how the
shravakas meditate on wisdom I'm the
foremost Buddha to me I'm the foremost
of shravaka disciples and wisdom how did
the Buddha safra's meditate on wisdom
that's how the Heart Sutra starts here
in the chapter that's called the Sutra
of the three heaps that that chapter or
then a section of that chapter and
Poly's I think inquiring with manjushri
how did the Bodhisattvas purify their
downfalls Manju she says something and
then I think he asks the Buddha and the
Buddha recites this part in that chapter
that's called the Sutra of the three
heaps which is essentially the could the
what you call the confession of the 35
Buddha's okay so that's why it's called
here confession of downfalls it's one of
the other names of it and then to do
this guru yoga imagining your guru on
your head while you recite his heart
mantra and so forth
so those are the three things that
mentions here but other lamas mentioned
especially guest rewrapped and mentions
here in general one can add to that
refuge collecting refuge and bodhichitta
one reciting Vajrasattva making the
prostrations along with the sutra of the
three heaps who can the sutra of the
confession of buddhist thought for
downfalls mandala offering and the Guru
yoga so it's just adding good gifts you
wrapped it and added also mandala
offering why is that what and what are
these why is one asked to do this before
why is it recommended
did before you begin to do intensive
meditation on the Maha mudra these are
these are what's called the kind of
special preliminary practices yeah so
especially in the glue / tradition it's
said that when lama tsongkhapa asked
manjushri for some hints you know what's
the what's the secret what's the
quickest way to make realizations was
you know it's a trick
Manju she said there's three things you
have to do you have to purify
negativities you have to accumulate
marriage and you have to pray to the
guru as oneness with the Buddha for
blessings crave pray for blessings from
the guru and then of course you can say
four things meditate just doing these
streets
your whole life's you do with
preliminaries you're not gonna make any
realizations right no you can you can
you can do you can do them
simultaneously and also I remember your
often times people to do a hundred
thousand prostrations they often take
has anyone done hundred thousand
frustrations I did I think how long did
it take you okay you did it you spread
that okay so if you did it all at one
time if that was all your doing
generally people would go to boot guy
maybe two months two and a half months
you're sunburned guess you sampled
that's right because she sent over told
me he did
guess she pistachio song at copán who
was like the workhorse it copepod I
don't know if any of you met did you
know it : Robbie yes you've a Lama for
son so Lama for song he was the one that
went shopping that disciplined the boys
while Linda was the head teacher you
know a lama pasang was one time I
mentioned to lama yeshe that I had
because I was in charge of buying
groceries for the Sangha the Western
Sangha and I was mentioning how Lamba
Poisson was in town
he was giving me these orders and I'm
gonna look today's llama for song is
gurus body is Buddha's body and I
realized baby you know just take this
aspect of he beat the boys you know he
built the houses and he did the shopping
but he was maybe emanation of the Buddha
but so at one time long before song s
Kalama yes she could he do could he take
time off to do hundred thousand
frustrations and Lama said no and then
said lama tsong begged and yes she said
you have one week I know in two weeks
two weeks so he did a hundred thousand
prostrations in two weeks
like continually like he might sleep for
three hours and it was every good so
it's possible so don't don't Shrek you
know just just tell your kids they're
not gonna see mom yeah okay so Lamas
okapis that's so mondo Suri's advice to
lama tsongkhapa to make realizations you
have to eliminate the the adverse
conditions which means the negative
karmic instincts in your mind that
predispose you to negative thing
negative thoughts to interruptions in
your practice maybe you get sick you get
angry easily or you get sued or you
don't have the fortune to find a place
to do retreat you don't have funds to do
research you have to purify that
negative karma then just like in growing
a field if you wanted a plant a field
you eliminate the rocks the stumps you
level the field and then you have to add
some fertilizers in the field right
before you plant the crops generally you
have to make especially if the field is
barren which our minds are very much
barren here at the barren in the sense
of virtual your minds are probably less
barren and mine is just from instinct
from past lives but say so one has to
either add to the virtue already in your
mind we okay then sure you does it tell
you to stand up okay mine just told me
just
I thought yours did too 10 minutes
before the hour it shapes so we have to
accumulate merit purify negativity
accumulate merit which becomes a
substantial cause of the realizations
and then like the moisture to receive
the blessings of the guru to buddha
through his emanation in the world the
Guru you can receive powerful blessings
without a physical guru by thinking
Shakyamuni is your guru you know you
could resits as long as you think your
guru is a perfect being you could
receive powerful blessings but they
won't necessarily be quick because it's
not someone whose you have an intimate
relationship with if you can find an
actual teacher in the world with you
correcting you don't eat that way wash
your hands now learn the alphabet this
is the way to meditate on emptiness
giving you all you know maybe you know
the boys or girls at the monasteries in
other areas they might have had teachers
that taught them from a very young age
so the Guru is someone who's in the
world right now teaching us if you can
see them as the Buddha which requires
some understanding it's not an easy
thing to do sometimes people with a lot
of faith don't find it difficult but
it's it is very profound practice what
we call guru it's called the profound
guru yoga you know practice of Guru
devotion if you can see your present
teacher as the Buddha you not only
receive powerful blessings but rapid
blessings in one lifetime so that's why
we do here to receive the blessings
we're not just thinking shakyamuni on
your head and reciting Shakyamuni's
mantra and nectar coming you receive
strong blessings that way but if you
visualize your guru
who you've come to understand as
inseparable from the Buddha from the
omniscient mind and you call upon him or
her by reciting their name and Sanskrit
like my my teacher's name Lama Yeshe was
Moony Gianna Moony is short for Tipton
to to mean - is Monisha sana Gianna
Munna Shah sana means tipton in Tibetan
Gianna so he'd say Oh our guru
vajradhara noonish asana gana city home
that that would be Lama issues Naima
mantra so I guess she'd Galax you have
to see what his name is
what's this Gish of this first name
again a gaelic TRADOC so you'd have to
find out this Sanskrit of Gaelic Gaelic
introduc TRADOC is dharmic routine right
did you know that sure sure is Dharma
rock means renowned or kurti so that's
it's a famous name of a famous very many
many famous pundits in India so guess
you wrapped in adds to that the taking
of refuge in generating bodhichitta and
making mandala offerings so it doesn't
mean you have to do hand mudra you have
to have a mandala set which is useful to
focus the mind the main thing is the
mental state of mind that recognizes all
that you can perceive the whole universe
without attachment that you could give
it up give it again and again to the
Buddha we'll talk a little bit about
that a bit later these these preliminary
practices so if you were to do a retreat
say if you wanted to do a three-month
retreat you're not going to do a
three-year retreat there's three-month
retreat you might spend the first week
doing preliminary practices as many you
would do prostrations
till you retired reciting the confession
Sutra you sit down relax then you might
make mandala offerings until you the
board is it doing the same thing over
and over again yeah you do first what
you do usually you do the long liturgy
offering this the mandala the thirty
seven heaps or whatever then you
continue saying Sachi pokey droopy metal
drummer erupting they you know just a
four-line or some other verses like and
you know some of the other tantras there
are other very short versions you say
again and again after having and then
once in a while you do the long run
against you imagine all the continents
all the the possessions of the universal
monarch that you have created the Karma
for do you have the Karma to have a
Dharma chakra you know that comes in the
sky and can take your troops to the
other continents you do every time you
make a prostration you create the Karma
to be a chakra Vardhan king and have
those positions possessions as many
times as there are atoms underneath your
body so that's why lamas when they make
prostrations they often make long
frustrations they cover more you know
really completely not not just like you
know they could completely go down so in
so doing we create the Karma to own
these all of these things and the
precious elephant the precious horse you
know the Dharma the the Dharma wheel and
so the precious Dharma I said precious
wheel and so forth precious Queen so you
ought you offer all of these things the
best of samsara to the group so to
accumulate merit
so just for auspicious and so I'm gonna
just to read a little bit more we're
almost almost at the end so from your
heart makes repeated requests to your
root guru who is indivisible from all
the Buddha's of the three times so that
would that was very short on preparation
we'll go back to that later when we do
some of it during the weekend we'll do
some of these preliminaries okay just
for auspiciousness actual practice which
is the main part of the the route text
there are many ways to explain Maha
mudra but they fall into two categories
sutra and tantra Maha mudra Tantra mad
room Maha mudra or his intent
Rachmaninoff Odra is the Maha mudra of
Saroja
remember the Fletcher Syrah means it's a
girl's name right Sarah
Sarah also liked samsara Sarah is Indian
word that means arrow so sometimes in
the protection wheel in the various
tenses there's a within the fire there's
arrows going around there's a mantra
that has the word Sarah in it because
talking about flaming arrows Sarah ha
tantric Maha mudra is the Maha mudra of
Saroja Nagarjuna Naropa who studied with
Phil Oba and my Tripa you know are my
Tripa Institute in Portland RMT is named
after one of the Maha siddhis in the
clear light of great bliss in it in
tantric Maha mudra the clear light of
great bliss is produced from skill
skillful means such as penetrating the
vital points of the Vajra body itself it
is the quintessence of the highest yoga
Tantra taught in the corpus of essential
works of the Maha siddhis so remember I
said before from at entry point of view
Maha mudra meant this immutable
combination of great bliss wisdom
realizing emptiness so the way it puts
it here the clear light of great bliss
is produced from skillful means such as
penetrating the vital points of the
Vajra body have you heard that
expression before penetrating the vital
points so if you know the vital point
like say you can try to develop Buddha
cheetah for a long long period of time
if you don't know what the defining
characteristic of it is the vital points
you can you know beat yourself and
criticize yourself you never develop
bodhichitta there's a a graphic
explanation of this I'm going to go a
couple minutes over is that okay for
with people if anyone has a babysitter
waiting it's just 9 o'clock just now but
I'm gonna get it with your permission
I'll just go a couple more minutes it's
okay so there's a graphic example of
this so don't don't be too upset a
butcher unskillful butcher you
know the other people don't know
anything they bring the the cow or the
buffalo and they take a big log and they
feed it on the head until it's dead they
cut up the body not so good oh no I'm
not sure I'm still the best one who's
going to be someone still kills the
Buffalo in this example that's what I
say it's just an example the middle ling
butcher is one who has a knife or a
sword or axe and they come up to the
bull the buffalo still knows you're
going to get it you know and there's the
adrenaline is going through his body I
mean maybe he's able to hit it the first
time maybe not the skillful butcher in
ancient India was the sort of like the
professional butcher comes with a little
little pouch a long needle comes up to
the buffalo pat sit on the face puts the
the needle in the vital point here right
between the eyes and goes right into its
brain and the Buffalo just falls out no
trauma no struggle as you say that's
disgusting but his example just example
if you know the vital point you can
avoid all of the hardship in developing
something so what is talking about
penetrating the vital points of the
Vajra body in the tantric mahamudra
that's referring to certain chakras
and points within our body that by
meditating on their bringing your
concentration there remember I mentioned
that the the mind and it's mounted wind
I didn't didn't mention today but
they're inseparable you can't have a
mind without a mounted wind that is its
vehicle that moves it did you know that
no they're inseparable even though the
wind is a subtle for in a matter the
consciousness is not matter its
immaterial it's all they're both
impermanent they're the two of the of
the three categories of impermanent
phenomena matter consciousness is the
third category called Nanak
non-associated compositional factors
that are neat they're impermanent but
neither matter nor consciousness so if
you bring your mind to a certain place
in your body concentrate like it's your
navel chakra that will bring the wind
it's mounted winds there too and that
can cause that's what's called
penetrating the vital point if you know
the right place to meditate that's why
the these ten trick meditations are very
sensitive to you have to very carefully
over a long period of time even through
experience try to find where that vital
point is by concentrating in various
points until you start to penetrate that
so this this is just this is talking
about tantric Maha mudra it is the clear
light of great bliss in it the clear
light of great bliss is produced from
the skillful means such as penetrating
the vital points of the Vajra body
itself it is the quintessence of the
highest yoga Tantra taught in the corpus
of essential works of the Maha siddhis
Sutra Maha mudra on the other hand is
the way to meditate on emptiness taught
explicitly in the extensive intermediate
and condensed perfection of wisdom
sutras it's law there's a hundred
thousand
one time when the Buddha taught the
perfection of wisdom one particular
lecture was enshrined in three different
written editions hundred thousand verse
perfection of wisdom what's the next one
twenty-five thousand the short one is
the eight thousand the heart sutra and
other sutras that you have they're not
they're a perfection of wisdom sutures
but they're not of this triad this group
of three so in the in that great the
hundred thousand twenty five thousand
and eight thousand verse perfection of
wisdom Sutra is explains how to meditate
on emptiness the supreme Aria the
superior being who'd realized emptiness
Nagarjuna has stated that there is no
path to liberation
other than this other than realizing
emptiness as taught by the Buddha here I
will give a commentary according to his
intention and show how to introduce the
nature of the mind
conventional clear light nature of the
mind in accordance with the statements
of the lineage gurus this is page 119 if
you happen to have this book was just
finishing there we're gonna continue
next time any thoughts questions
okay so I feel very fortunate to talk
about this with people like yourselves
who have practice for a long period of
time many of you some of you knew but
some of you practice a long time have
faith in the teachings and are eager to
hear you so I feel very fortunate having
heard these teachings from His Holiness
the Dalai Lama and other Lamas try to
practice a little bit I try to share
with you in the next you know tomorrow
and Sunday we'll try to finish the text
give a like a first coach you know
painting the the wood in your mind of
the Maha mudra you don't don't expect
that you're gonna know everything
because I don't know everything
obviously I mean even what I think I
know who is truffle some of is wrong
but it will act perhaps as a basis for
you to continue study when other Lamas
teach the mahamudra you might be able to
go a little more in depth and main thing
is to put it into practice because as I
said on the basis of practice then to
delineate the view you don't have to
worry about the view of emptiness right
now main thing is to try to calm the
mind and get this understanding in a
experience of the clear light nature of
the mind which is an analog of emptiness
it's not ultimate reality it's a
conventional reality the clear light
nature of the mind but it has certain
features in common with emptiness that
make that transition of meditating on
emptiness seamless okay so with that
let's dedicate whatever little merit or
much merit that we've created this
evening sit comfortably
see if you can recall that calm state of
mind after we did the nine round
breathing
and then recall the clear light nature
of the mind again
whatever thoughts are in your mind
they're all like birds or clouds within
this spaciousness of the mind and just
as we will do later within that clear
light nature of the mind investigating
the self the object to be negated and so
forth
now just recognize that this evening
we've created some virtuous karma which
will ripen on us our continuum within
cyclic existence if left to its own
devices we can actually direct it just
like a horse if we have the bridle of a
horse we can pull it in one direction or
the other rather than letting it ripen
only and some superficial happiness
within cyclic existence we can dedicate
these merits that they make strong
aspiration wish that they only ripen in
ways that enhance our spiritual
development in which in a way that we
also benefit other sentient beings we
become more kind we're loving or
compassionate or wise less a problem for
others and leading all the way to the
uncontaminated state of enlightenment
due to these merits may I quickly become
a Buddha for the sake of all sentient
beings
thank you very much so we'll see you
tomorrow at least those of you who have
the time you come I think what is it
tomorrow 10:00 oh okay I thought it's
9:00 10:00 o'clock okay so you have a
time have a nice breakfast don't eat
don't eat too heavy because when you as
you know probably from your own
experience when you if you're doing
meditation better to be just a little
less than you know fill up completely
otherwise you get more sleepy
take care